ARC v2.5.0 DURABLE STATE AND INTEGRITY CONTRACT

DS-001 ONE ROOM, ONE RECORD

The ordinary ARC data root is:

  ~/Library/Application Support/ARC/

Each retained room has one authoritative human-readable record:

  rooms/<Room ID>.arcroom

It is a canonical UTF-8 JSON regular file described exactly by 011. It contains
room identity, participants, Producer, work, complete Activity, and retry facts.
ARC maintains no second projection, hidden index, cursor file, or recovery
journal.

One adjacent regular file remains for local serialization:

  rooms/<Room ID>.arcroom.lock

It is mode 0600, contains zero bytes, and carries no room state or evidence.
Its inode remains stable so waiters cannot split across an unlink and recreate.
An exclusive `flock` is held only for the bounded duration of one room
operation.

DS-002 CANONICAL ROOM BYTES

The complete room file is 1 through 8,388,608 bytes. It is pretty-printed JSON
using UTF-8, two-space structural indentation, sorted object keys, unescaped
slashes, LF line endings, and exactly one final LF. Persisted field names are
lowercase snake case. Strings use native NFC normalization. Numbers are signed
64-bit integers; floating-point values do not exist.

Normal writes reserve 1,024 bytes plus 4,096 bytes per non-retired participant
within that maximum. Retirement and tick updates may consume this reserve for
retirement events, due qualification failures, and clock/counter growth. They
still obey the complete 8 MiB bound. Existing files already lacking this reserve
are not pruned or automatically deleted; DS-011 defines their confirmed
recovery exception.

An accepted file must decode to the exact 011 types and encode byte-for-byte to
the supplied file. This equality rejects duplicate or unknown keys, alternate
whitespace, alternate escapes, noncanonical number spelling, reordered keys,
trailing bytes, or an otherwise ambiguous representation.

DS-003 ONE LOCKED REVISION

Every create, read, poll, act, Administrator change, tick, diagnosis, and delete
operation derives the exact room path from a validated Room ID and acquires the
room lock. The lock wait is at most five seconds, checked every 20 milliseconds.
Expiry returns BUSY and changes nothing.

A read opens the room with no final-link following, proves it is one bounded
regular file, reads it completely, and validates canonical bytes and the stored
Room ID. It returns one complete revision. It never combines fields from
different reads.

A mutation reads and validates one complete prior revision, checks all lane,
authority, generation, work revision, operation, time, and limit preconditions,
then constructs one complete next revision in memory. A refused requested
action never leaks a partial action mutation. An independently due qualification
failure may still commit under CLI-009; otherwise a pre-publication refusal
leaves the prior file byte-identical. A final I/O failure after rename may leave
the complete new revision present; follow the exact-retry rule in DS-009.

DS-004 ATOMIC PUBLICATION

The next canonical bytes are written to a new unpredictable same-directory
regular file opened with create-exclusive and no final-link following. ARC
writes all bytes, synchronizes the file, atomically renames it over the room,
and synchronizes the `rooms` directory. The room is never edited in place.

An interruption produces the complete old or complete new room after reopen.
A failed stage is removed only by its exact ARC-created descriptor/path. An
unknown sibling is never guessed to be stale or deleted. Room creation follows
the same write path but refuses an existing room or lock collision.

DS-005 REVISION AND SEQUENCE

Room revision starts at 1 and increases by exactly one for every committed
mutation. A read-only operation does not increase it. `next_sequence` starts at
1. Every committed Activity item receives that value, then `next_sequence`
increases. Sequence values never repeat or reset.

One mutation may append more than one Activity item when the single typed action
has multiple visible consequences. Their sequences are consecutive and the
operation result lists the requested action's events in order, excluding any
independently due qualification-failure events committed before that action.
The room's `updated_at` is the commit
time. A retry that returns an existing result is read-only and adds no Activity.

DS-006 PORTABLE NONDECREASING TIME

Durable room time is UTC epoch microseconds. A valid sample is a finite,
nonnegative system wall time within REC-011's supported LogicalTime range. For a
mutation:

  logical_us = max(room.last_clock_logical_us, sampled_wall_us)

The committed value replaces `last_clock_logical_us`; therefore a backward or
equal wall sample cannot move room time backward. Human timestamps are the
canonical UTC rendering `YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.ffffffZ` of that value.

If the system or injected clock cannot supply a valid sample, a mutating tick,
poll, or act returns CLOCK_UNAVAILABLE and does not pretend that an AI checked
in or acted. A read view reports TIME_UNAVAILABLE. The app may use system uptime
only to schedule its next local refresh; uptime is never stored or treated as
room truth.

Rename, invite, instruction replacement, and retirement remain available to
the Administrator when wall time is unavailable. Those four operations use the
retained logical time, mark their Activity payload `time_verified:false`, and
do not invent an AI check-in. Qualification retry and Producer selection still
require usable wall time.

DS-007 ACTIVITY LASTS AS LONG AS THE ROOM

Activity retains every committed event for the room's lifetime. ARC never
silently removes, truncates, summarizes, or replaces an older event. Paging is
only presentation; it does not change storage. Activity is complete room
history, not a cryptographic journal, signature, or hash chain.

The 8 MiB room bound remains a fail-closed safety limit. A mutation whose exact
canonical next revision would exceed it returns LIMIT_EXCEEDED and leaves the
prior room byte-identical. The existing room remains readable and its complete
history remains available. Permanently deleting the room deletes that history.

DS-008 COLLECTION AND MEMORY BOUNDS

One room permits at most:

  participants        64
  non-COMPLETE work   50
  work items          256
  retained Activity   every event that fits the bounded room
  poll page events    50
  room bytes          8 MiB
  action request      128 KiB
  event payload       64 KiB

Additional text and evidence bounds are in 011. Reads and writes are bounded by
the complete room maximum. ARC never maps an unbounded file, recursively loads
host data, or allocates from an unchecked length.

DS-009 OPERATION RETRY

Each participant has one current random operation UUID. `act` requires it and
stores the request SHA-256 plus definitive result summary on success. A retry
of the same token and exact canonical request returns the stored result without
another mutation. The same token with different request bytes returns
OPERATION_CONFLICT. A prior or unknown token returns OPERATION_STALE.

After a successful act, ARC supplies one new operation UUID. A definitive
validation or state refusal does not consume a current token. A lost response
or uncertain I/O/publication result requires an identical request and token
retry before changing the request. An Administrator
mutation similarly stores one last operation ID and request digest at room
level so a lost local result cannot duplicate the change.

Room creation derives stable ID candidates from the creation operation UUID
and a bounded collision counter. The original ROOM_CREATED event identifies
the replay and its normalized name, even after later Administrator changes.
A repeated UUID/name returns the existing room; changing the name with that
creation UUID returns OPERATION_CONFLICT. Deletion ends this replay lifetime.

DS-010 REFUSAL AND RECOVERY

Missing rooms return NOT_FOUND. A different `format` returns ROOM_INCOMPATIBLE.
Malformed bytes, identity mismatch, invalid invariant, or noncanonical JSON
returns ROOM_CORRUPT. Unsafe files or parents return IO_FAILURE. None is
rewritten automatically.

The app lists an unreadable canonical room filename in Recovery with the first
safe failure and a next action. Diagnose reads bounded facts and content-free
invariants. ARC does not rewrite, discard, or field-repair unreadable bytes.

DS-011 PERMANENT ROOM DELETION

Delete Room acquires the same room lock, validates the room identity, and
normally requires every participant to be RETIRED. If a non-writing simulation
of every remaining retirement exceeds the room limit, deletion may proceed
without retirement only with usable time, no On Duty or unexpired Working AI,
and no unexpired active qualification test. The simulation uses the same
retirement code as the normal action. Every condition is rechecked under the
deletion lock; stale UI permission does not authorize a changed room. The
confirmation explicitly warns that remaining lanes end without recording
retirement and that complete history is permanently lost. ARC then unlinks exactly the selected
`.arcroom` file, synchronizes the rooms directory, removes its empty adjacent
lock, and synchronizes again. It never uses the macOS Trash, deletes another
room, or offers restoration. The confirmation states that deletion and the
room's complete history are permanent.
