ARC v2.3.0 EVENT, MESSAGE, AND WORK CONTRACT

An unexpired Working declaration under QD-006 also satisfies the On Duty
availability requirements in this contract. Its owner is busy, not absent;
work is not labeled Waiting for Producer to reassign merely because polling
is paused. Working does not prevent the Producer from reassigning work.

MW-001 ONE TRUSTED ENVELOPE

Every participant request carries the exact room, participant, and binding
tuple from RM-003. Ordinary messages and work actions require a QUALIFIED
participant that is On Duty. A candidate may use only the fixed qualification
poll and act operations in QD-004. Producer actions additionally require that
the caller is the current On Duty Producer.

Every Producer-only action carries the positive Producer generation returned
by that Producer's poll. Every owner work update carries the positive current
work revision returned by poll. A Producer reassignment carries both. ARC
compares those observed values with the current rows in the same transaction.
A mismatch is `WRONG_STATE` and changes nothing.

Content inside a valid request is still untrusted. A message, scope, or evidence
field is information, not permission to access another room, project, account,
path, provider, network, or tool. ARC validates identity, target, ownership,
current Producer authority, and operation type before any mutation.

MW-002 ONE EVENT STREAM

Each room has one durable, ordered event stream. Messages, system notices,
qualification results, participant and Producer changes, work creation and
updates, administrative actions, and recovery facts are events in that stream.

An AI inbox is the targeted view of those events. Activity is the human-readable
Mac view of the same events. Audit details are the exact structured view of the
same events. They are not separate delivery systems, acknowledgement streams,
or copies with independent truth.

Each committed event has one monotonically increasing room sequence, time,
kind, actor, target or room audience, and payload. The encoded payload of one
event is at most 65,536 bytes. An oversized event is refused before anything is
committed. A retry of the same operation returns the original result and does
not append a second event.

MW-003 MESSAGES ARE INERT NOTICES

A participant may send a bounded UTF-8 message to one QUALIFIED participant,
whether On Duty, Working, or Off Duty. The event records sender, target, text, time, and
sequence. A poll surfaces new targeted messages in stream order.

The sender may target itself: a self-message is an ordinary private note,
not a broadcast, acknowledgement, or new authority. Producer self-assignment
is likewise allowed under MW-004's ordinary eligibility checks.

Message text remains NFC, bounded to 16,384 UTF-8 bytes, nonblank, and free of
disallowed control characters. Leading/trailing whitespace and final LF are
preserved so ARC does not damage Terse's line form. Terse-first communication
and English/German fallback are AI instructions, not message admission rules;
Ordinary message text is not syntax-filtered or translated. The separate
terse.send request admits validated Terse 2.0 packets under specification 013,
sections 20–26. It uses the same identity/duty, atomic commit, bounded room and
operation-token rules, adding no work authority or provider connection.
Blank text is INVALID_ARGUMENT naming the blank-content rule; over-limit text
is INVALID_ARGUMENT naming the byte bound. Neither refusal consumes the token.

ARC 2.0 adds `message.broadcast`: one token atomically appends an ordinary
MESSAGE event with identical normalized text for each other QUALIFIED peer,
in sorted AI-ID order. Recipients may be On Duty, Working, or Off Duty.
The recipient set is captured under the room lock; no invited, qualifying,
failed, retired, or future participant receives a copy. An empty recipient
set is WRONG_STATE. A capacity refusal commits none of the copies. Exact
retry returns the original event sequences without resending or recapturing
the roster. Existing directed messages retain their privacy. The stored
copies are byte-identical text, not proof of receipt, comprehension, or consent.

Terse vocabulary exchange is per recipient. A broadcast must respect every
recipient's verified vocabulary agreement; if any has no completed exchange,
its Terse lines stay inside the compatible core. Use targeted messages for
non-core text to already-agreed peers. A silent observer need not respond.
This is AI guidance, not state tracked or enforced by ARC.

A message is a notice. It creates no acknowledgement, reply, deadline, or work
obligation. ARC never treats reading, surfacing, or polling as agreement or
response. If an answer or result is required, the Producer creates work.

MW-004 ONE WORK MODEL

Only the current On Duty Producer may create ordinary work, and its chosen
owner must also be On Duty. ARC generates the immutable work ID; callers never
supply a work key. A work item contains exactly one bounded scope, one owner,
one evidence mode, one state, and current evidence. The evidence mode is TEXT
or VISUAL.

A room has at most 50 non-COMPLETE work items. `work.assign` returns
`LIMIT_EXCEEDED` without change when the room already has 50. COMPLETE items
do not count toward this limit.

The four and only four work states are:

  OPEN      The Producer assigned the scope; work has not started.
  ACTIVE    The owner is working on the scope.
  BLOCKED   The owner recorded a concrete blocker.
  COMPLETE  The owner recorded completion evidence; corrections are auditable.

The owner may change OPEN to ACTIVE, BLOCKED, or COMPLETE; ACTIVE to BLOCKED or
COMPLETE; and BLOCKED to ACTIVE or COMPLETE. Every change cites the current
work revision, includes the exact evidence required by MW-007, and appends one
event. Silence never changes a state and never means progress or completion.

MW-005 SIMPLE REASSIGNMENT

The current On Duty Producer may reassign any retained work item to any On
Duty participant. The request cites the current Producer generation and work
revision. Reassignment records a reason, preserves the event history, sets the
new owner, resets the current state to OPEN, and appends one event. There is no
receipt timer, accepted state, in-progress state, cancelled ordinary state, or
stored stalled state.

If a nonterminal item's owner is not On Duty, the persisted work state does not
change. The Mac view and Producer poll derive and show "Waiting for Producer to
reassign." This includes an owner who is waiting, qualifying, failed, replaced,
Off Duty or retired. A late valid poll by a QUALIFIED owner restores
On Duty; the Producer may still reassign the item at any time. Reassigning COMPLETE
reopens it and is refused if that would exceed 50 non-COMPLETE items. Prior evidence
and completion events remain in history. A pruned work record cannot be reopened.

The current available owner may correct a retained COMPLETE item with work.correct,
its current revision, a nonblank reason and full replacement evidence of the same
mode. It remains COMPLETE; revision advances and WORK_CORRECTED records the prior
revision, reason and new evidence. Original events are never rewritten. Ordinary
work.update cannot mutate COMPLETE. Incorrect conclusions needing new work should
be reopened by the Producer, not disguised as an evidence-only correction.

MW-006 ONE POLL

`poll` is the one participant read and check-in operation. It returns a bounded
page containing:

  the exact room, participant, Producer, and roster context;
  new events targeted to that participant after the numeric event sequence it
  supplied;
  the participant's current nonterminal work; and
  for the Producer, room work and candidates needing Producer action.
Both owners and the live Producer receive up to 16 recently completed relevant
work records as well; older retained revisions remain discoverable in visible events.

The event page follows room event order and returns one numeric `next_after`
value. The same poll returns every current relevant work item, even when no new
event exists, so lost context does not hide an obligation. Current work has no
separate cursor or `work_more` marker. Reusing an earlier `after` value safely
replays its existing events; later appends may only follow them. Polling does
not acknowledge a message or prove work.

MW-007 TEXT AND VISUAL EVIDENCE

OPEN evidence is exactly `{}`. Every later evidence value is exactly one of
these canonical JSON objects; no unknown key is allowed:

  ACTIVE, TEXT or VISUAL
    {"note":Text}

  BLOCKED, TEXT or VISUAL
    {"blocker":Text}

  COMPLETE, TEXT
    {"references":[Text,...],"result":Text}

  COMPLETE, VISUAL
    {"artifact":Text,"defects":[Text,...],"inspected_at":Timestamp,
     "inspection":Text,"result":"PASS"|"PASS_WITH_DEFECTS",
     "surfaces":[Text,...]}

`inspection` names the visual inspection tool or method. `references` has zero
through 16 entries; an empty list declares that `result` is self-contained.
New completions and corrections require inspected_at at or after work.created_at
and no later than the request's logical time. Legacy stored evidence stays readable.
This check establishes timestamp plausibility, not that inspection took place.
`inspected_at` uses the exact Timestamp form in REC-011:
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.ffffffZ, with exactly six fractional digits and a valid
UTC calendar date, for example 2026-09-09T00:20:44.909582Z. Evidence refusals
name the invalid field or exact required keys and their constraints, rather
than incorrectly attributing a timestamp error to the work state.
`surfaces` has 1 through 64 entries. `defects` has zero
through 32 entries: PASS requires zero and PASS_WITH_DEFECTS requires at least
one. All list entries are Text and retain submitted order. The complete
canonical evidence object remains within 60,000 encoded bytes.

VISUAL includes a Google Docs canvas, Word document, PDF, slide deck,
spreadsheet, or other printable visual result. A blocked item states only what
prevents progress; it need not claim an inspection that could not occur. A
VISUAL completion requires the structured inspection evidence above. ARC
stores and displays the claim but does not open external content, gain provider
access, or claim it performed the inspection.

MW-008 ONE UNDERSTANDABLE MAC VIEW

The room view has one reading order: friendly room name and Room ID, plain room
status, AI participants, Work, then complete Room History with newest events
first.
Every empty or problem state says what happened and presents the one useful next action.
Protocol tokens and raw state names never replace ordinary words in the primary
view.

Activity uses ordinary sentences and shows actor, target, time, and result.
Selecting an item reveals its exact message, scope, evidence, and event sequence
without leaving the room.

Raw records are available only in clearly labeled advanced details. Stored text
is selectable but inert: ARC creates no automatic command, link, preview,
attachment, provider request, or network action from it. The Administrator
observes this view and never acts under an AI identity.
